Data Types : Data types define the kind of data that can be stored in a variable. Common Python data types include:
            1 int – Integer numbers (e.g., 10)
            2 float – Decimal numbers (e.g., 3.14)
            3 str – Text or strings (e.g., "Hello")
            4 bool – True or False values
Data Structures : Data structures are used to organize and store data efficiently. The main Python data structures are:
                 1 List - Ordered and mutable collection.
                 2 Tuple - Ordered and immutable collection.
                 3 Dictionary - Stores data as key-value pairs.
                 4 Set - Unordered collection of unique elements.
Data Pipeline : A data pipeline is a sequence of steps used to collect, clean, transform, and store data so it can be analyzed or used in machine learning. The basic stages are:
               7 Stages of a Data Pipeline
               1 Data Collection - Gather data from sources such as databases, CSV files, APIs, sensors, or websites.
               2 Data Ingestion - Import the collected data into the pipeline for further processing.
               3 Data Cleaning - Remove duplicate records, handle missing values, and correct errors to improve data quality.
               4 Data Transformation - Convert the data into the required format by encoding, scaling, aggregating, or creating new features.
               5 Data Validation - Check that the data is accurate, complete, consistent, and follows the required rules.
               6 Data Storage - Save the processed data in a database, data warehouse, or cloud storage for future use.
               7 Data Analysis / Visualization / Model Building - Use the processed data to create reports, dashboards, or train machine learning models to gain insights and make predictions.


Data Cleaning : Data Cleaning is the process of identifying and correcting errors, missing values, duplicate records, and inconsistent data to improve 
                the quality of a dataset before analysis or machine learning.
Steps in Data Cleaning :
1 Handle Missing Values – Fill, remove, or replace missing data.
2 Remove Duplicate Records – Delete repeated rows from the dataset.
3 Correct Incorrect Data – Fix spelling mistakes, incorrect values, or wrong data formats.
4 Handle Outliers – Detect and treat unusual values that are much higher or lower than the rest of the data.
5 Convert Data Types – Convert data into the correct format (e.g., string to integer or date).
6 Standardize Data – Make data consistent by using the same format for dates, text, and units.
7 Rename Columns – Use meaningful and consistent column names.

Missing Values : Missing values are data points that are not available or are left blank in a dataset. They are usually represented as NaN, NULL, or empty cells.
        Example :
                 Name	Age	Salary
                 Aman	25	40000
                 Riya	NaN	45000

Here, Riya's Age is a missing value.

Outliers : Outliers are values that are significantly higher or lower than most of the other values in a dataset. They may occur due to data entry errors or genuine rare observations.
       Example :
               Salary values : 30000, 32000, 31000, 30500, 350000

Here, 350000 is an outlier because it is much larger than the other salary values.

EDA : Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA) is the process of examining and understanding a dataset before building a machine learning model. It helps 
      identify patterns, errors, and relationships in the data.
1. Understand the Dataset : Check the number of rows and columns,
                            View the first and last few records,
                            Understand the meaning of each column.
                            Common Commands : df.head(), df.tail(), df.shape, df.columns.
2. Check Data Types : Find the data type of each column (integer, float, string, etc.).
                      Command : df.dtypes
3. Check Missing Values : Identify columns that contain missing (NaN) values.
                          Command : df.isnull().sum()
4. Check Duplicate Records : Find and remove duplicate rows.
                             Commands : df.duplicated().sum()
                                        df.drop_duplicates()
5. Summary Statistics : Get statistical information about numerical columns.
                        Command : df.describe()
6. Check Unique Values : Find the unique values in a column.
                         Command : df["Column_Name"].unique()
7. Value Counts : Count the frequency of each category.
                  Command : df["Column_Name"].value_counts()
8. Detect Outliers : Find unusually high or low values using box plots or statistical methods.
                     Command : df.boxplot()
9. Correlation Analysis : Check how numerical columns are related.
                          Command : df.corr(numeric_only=True)
10. Data Visualization : Visualize the data to identify trends and patterns.
         Common plots : Histogram – Shows the distribution of data.
                        Bar Chart – Compares categories.
                        Box Plot – Detects outliers.
                        Scatter Plot – Shows the relationship between two numerical variables.
                        Pie Chart – Shows proportions.
Data Visualization : Data Visualization is the process of representing data in the form of graphs and charts.It helps us understand
                     patterns, trends, relationships, and outliers in a dataset more easily.
Matplotlib : Matplotlib is a basic Python library used for creating static graphs and charts. It provides full control 
             over the appearance of plots. It is widely used for data analysis and reporting.
Common charts in Matplotlib : Line Plot
                              Bar Chart
                              Histogram
                              Pie Chart
                              Scatter Plot
Seaborn : Seaborn is a Python visualization library built on top of Matplotlib.It provides attractive and informative statistical 
          graphs with less code. It is mainly used for Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA).
Common charts in Seaborn : Count Plot
                           Box Plot
                           Violin Plot
                           Heatmap
                           Pair Plot
                           Scatter Plot
Correlation : Correlation is a statistical measure that shows the relationship between two numerical variables.It tells us whether 
              one variable changes when another variable changes.
Types of Correlation :
1. Positive Correlation (+1) : Both variables increase or decrease together.
                              Example: Experience ↑ → Salary ↑
2. Negative Correlation (-1) : One variable increases while the other decreases.
                              Example: Speed ↑ → Travel Time ↓
3. No Correlation (0) : There is no relationship between the variables.
                       Example: Shoe Size and Salary
Correlation Value Range : +1 → Perfect positive correlation
                           0 → No correlation
                          -1 → Perfect negative correlation
Distribution : Distribution describes how the values of a variable are spread across a dataset. It helps us understand 
                the shape, center, and spread of the data.
Common Plots Used : Histogram,
                    Box Plot,
                    Density Plot (KDE)



